+++
title = "Why I Found Microsoft Office So Jarring"
date = 2022-02-19T12:54:00Z
images = []
tags = []
categories = []
draft = false
+++

Like a lot of people.  I was brought up on Microsoft Office: Word, Powerpoint,
etc. You did what you needed to do, save it to your computer, and if you wanted
to take it elsewhere you copied it onto a pendrive or disc, and haphazardly
left it on a train for a journalist to find. But throughout the process your
files were very much _in your possession_.  I had a whole childhood and
adolescence where that was the model.

Then at some point last decade the upgraded versions of the same office
products you'd been using starting taking your files from you, from your
computer that you were working  on the in, and storing them off "somewhere in
the cloud".

Contrast this to Google's equivalent products.  I make casual use of them for
personal stuff: speadsheeting holiday expenses, etc.  I've always used them
through the browser and the model is more like: I go to the cloud, work on my
files, then leave them there in my little bit of the cloud and they never leave
there.

An analogy I find is: imagine that your doing an office job before we had all
these computery things. Say you had a workflow you were fairly content with:
You had your desk, you took your files out of a draw, worked on them, then put
them back in.  Then one you're sitting at your desk working on a file, but now
when you're done someone comes along and says "I'll put that away for you".
"But where are you putting it?" you ask.  "Oh don't worry about that" they
reply, "just let me know when you want it back".  But then after they take it,
the file is still somehow there in your desk draw...

Confusion and fear would understandably ensue.

My experience of Microsoft 365 (I think is what they call it when things are
stored off in the cloud) is continuous second guessing about what's on my
computer, what's in the cloud, or both.  This is largely driven by the fact
we're still using the same desktop applications that we were brought up with
and are built around the model that your files are on your computer.  There are
other issues I've encountered around syncing, and locking which could be put
down to implementation quality.  But I've never been that confident
conceptually with what's going on.

Good usable design of products, physical and software, helps the user to form a
good mental model of how it works that stays true to it's behaviour.  You don't
have to know how it _really_ works, but you need a model which you base your
usage of the product on, and that needs to manifest the same outcomes and the
true implementation.

With the Google office products the mental model is one of going _to_ your bit
of the cloud through your browser, doing what you need to do, then leaving your
bit of the cloud, happy that your files will be there when you come back. I
never find myself worrying.

---

The good news is: I'm writing this blog post a few years too late.  These days
I don't have to deal with that many Word Documents or Powerpoints, and the
entirely online, in the browser, version of Microsoft Office is useable enough
for my purposes.  I also don't run Windows locally these days.  But in the past
when I did, and the browser native version of office was fairly unusable, I
inevitably found myself using the desktop Office applications and was in this
constant state of unease.
